post-merge updates: merge page (#7131)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/upgrades/merge/index.md

## Merging with Mainnet {#merging-with-mainnet}

Proof-of-work secured Ethereum Mainnet from genesis until The Merge. This allowed the Ethereum blockchain we're all used to to come into existence in July 2015 with all its familiar features—transactions, smart contracts, accounts, etc.

Throughout Ethereum's history, developers prepared for an eventual transition away from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake. On December 1, 2020, the Beacon Chain was created as a separate blockchain to Mainnet, running in parallel.

The Beacon Chain was not originally processing Mainnet transactions. Instead, it was reaching consensus on its own state by agreeing on active validators and their account balances. After extensive testing, it became time for the Beacon Chain to reach consensus on real world data. After The Merge, the Beacon Chain became the consensus engine for all network data, including execution layer transactions and account balances.

> The Merge represented the official switch to using the Beacon Chain as the engine of block production. Mining is no longer be the means of producing valid blocks. Instead, the proof-of-stake validators have adopted this role and are now responsible for processing the validity of all transactions and proposing blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Merge represented the official switch to using the Beacon Chain as the engine of block production. Mining is no longer the means of producing valid blocks. Instead, the proof-of-stake validators have adopted this role and are now responsible for processing the validity of all transactions and proposing blocks.
```

[More on Ethereum security](/security/#eth2-token-scam)

### Node operators and dapp developers {#node-operators-dapp-developers}

<ExpandableCard
title="Staking node operators and providers"
contentPreview="If you are a staker running your own node setup or a node infrastructure provider, there are a few things you need to be aware of after The Merge."
id="staking-node-operators">

Key action items include:

1. Run _both_ a consensus layer client and an execution layer client; third-party endpoints to obtain execution data no longer work since The Merge.
2. Authenticate both execution layer and consensus layer clients with a shared JWT secret so they can securely communicate.
3. Set a `fee recipient` address to receive your earned transaction fee tips/MEV.

Not completing the first two items above items will result in your node being seen as "offline" until both layers are synced and authenticated.

> Not setting a `fee recipient` will still allow your validator to behave as usual, but you will miss out on unburnt fee tips and any MEV you would have otherwise earned in blocks your validator proposes.

Author: yea good point for later

<ExpandableCard
title="Non-validating node operators and infrastructure providers"
contentPreview="If you're operating a non-validating Ethereum node, the most significant change that came with The Merge was the requirement to run clients for BOTH the execution layer AND the consensus layer."
id="node-operators">

> Up until The Merge, an execution client (such as Geth, Erigon, Besu or Nethermind) was enough to receive, properly validate, and propagate blocks being gossiped by the network. _After The Merge_, the validity of transactions contained within an execution payload now also also depends on the validity of the "consensus block" it is contained within.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up until The Merge, an execution client (such as Geth, Erigon, Besu or Nethermind) was enough to receive, properly validate, and propagate blocks being gossiped by the network. _After The Merge_, the validity of transactions contained within an execution payload now also depends on the validity of the "consensus block" it is contained within.
```

</ExpandableCard>

<ExpandableCard
title="Misconception: &quot;The Merge failed to reduced gas fees.&quot;"
contentPreview="False. The Merge was a change of consensus mechanism, not an expansion of network capacity, and was never intended to lower gas fees.">
Gas fees are a product of network demand relative to the capacity of the network. The Merge deprecated the use of proof-of-work, transitioning to proof-of-stake for consensus, but did not significantly change any parameters that directly influence network capacity or throughput.

With a [rollup-centric roadmap](https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/a-rollup-centric-ethereum-roadmap/4698), efforts are being focused on scaling user activity at [layer 2](/layer-2/), while enabling layer 1 Mainnet as a secure decentralized settlement layer optimized for rollup data storage to help make rollup transactions exponentially cheaper. The transition to proof-of-stake is a critical precursor to realizing this. [More on gas and fees.](/developers/docs/gas/)
</ExpandableCard>

<ExpandableCard

> title="Misconception: &quot;Transactions are noticeably faster after The Merge.&quot;"

Author: ```suggestion
title="Misconception: &quot;Transactions were accelerated substantially by The Merge.&quot;"
```

> contentPreview="False. Though some slight changes exist, transaction speed is mostly remain the same on layer 1.">

Author: ```suggestion
contentPreview="False. Though some slight changes exist, transaction speed is mostly the same on layer 1 now as it was before The Merge.">
```

### The Merge and the Beacon Chain {#merge-and-beacon-chain}

> The Merge represents the formal adoption of the Beacon Chain as the new consensus layer to the original Mainnet execution layer. Since the Merge, validators are assigned to secure Ethereum Mainnet, and mining on [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/) is no longer a valid means of block production.

Reviewer 2: I haven't been perfect about this, and I don't always love how it ends up looking, but for consistency:
```suggestion
The Merge represents the formal adoption of the Beacon Chain as the new consensus layer to the original Mainnet execution layer. Since The Merge, validators are assigned to secure Ethereum Mainnet, and mining on [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/) is no longer a valid means of block production.
```
